when you manage your mind you can change
your cellular health your biological age
in other words
um and so you control that so you
literally with your mind control how
your dna functions
hey everybody welcome to health theory
today's guest
is best-selling author dr caroline leaf
she's a cognitive neuroscientist with a
phd in communication pathology
who's been researching the brain mental
health and memory formation for over 30
years her insights and methodology have
helped over a million people to improve
the quality of their lives
and have made her a highly sought after
speaker who lectures to audiences
around the world additionally she runs
the integrated mind network and is
participating in a dc based mental
health initiative
that is a part of her tireless efforts
to reduce the global stigma around
mental health dr leaf thank you so much
for joining us today
oh i'm thrilled thank you yeah of course
so
um i'm super curious to know if if your
um your skype can be believed you are
now
in dallas texas um how how does one go
from south africa and i think were you
you were born somewhere else even from
there
yes yeah i got an interesting history i
was born in zimbabwe
and grew up in south africa and we've
been in the states now for 12 years
so we're based in dallas but we travel
globally 70
of the month pre-covered post covered
and during covert we obviously haven't
traveled but
yeah our main offer we based in dallas
so i'm my mom was
english my dad well irish english my dad
italian so i'm kind of a mixture and my
husband swiss so
put that all together and it's it's an
interesting mix
so i start with that is because one of
the things i find most interesting about
your work is
the whole idea of identity and how
important that is for people and i know
you work with people a lot on that
and one of the things that i have found
certainly anchored my own identity and
i've seen anchor a lot of people's
identity is where they're from
and so having that sort of high level of
being a nomad and
going to all these places one how has
that impacted your identity
how do you think about identity and you
know what are what's your guidance for
people trying to solidify
a useful identity tom that's an
excellent question and it's really a
good place to start because
when i worked in clinical practice which
i did for 25 years
it's the first area that you need to
work with with people because your
identity is your value
so if your identity if you know how to
manage your identity you can be
absolutely anywhere
and that doesn't throw you you know you
don't attach your identity to a place
you attach it to yourself which is a
healthy way of doing it and i think
probably the work
um it's good you i'm glad you asked me
about south africa too because
my initial research was obviously done
there and i would spend
three days up to three days a week
working in the apartheid era because i
mean i'm
this is back in the 80s in the
transition with mandela coming in and
then post apartheid
and you know with this everything that's
going on currently at the moment with
racism
i saw firsthand what was happening to
people's identity
and a lot of my initial brain research
was done and that's where i honestly
learned
most of what i do because i was in the
trenches dealing with people whose
identity had been removed
a classic example of identity is nelson
mandela and
when he was when he was sent to prison
in on robben island one of the things
that they did
was they the first thing besides you
know all the inhumane things they did
was that they
took their id card away and your id card
already in an apartheid south africa
um to that id card meant everything and
the first thing they would do say take
it away and say you you have no value
you you have no identity and then they
would
put them in you know the prison outfits
and there was no recognition of identity
and
that's how they would broke a lot of
these spirits and it's interesting how
mandela took that and turned that into
what we know
transformed that experience into
something very constructive whereas
there was a
the traditional i mean the the
well-known hema murderer who was
um incarcerated at the same time as him
and what they would have to do all day
long would hit
hit these white stones with a hammer and
it was there was no no recognition no
value for them as a human
and they would just do this day in and
day out dehumanizing and
when when mandela got out of prison we
know what he did
he transformed the world impacted the
world the hammer murder went on to be
the hammer murder he actually murdered
people and became a serial killer
and there's two classic examples of
people whose identities were removed
and who used that in a different way and
transform that in a different way
so if i had to define identity it's
really simple it's how you uniquely
think
and feel and choose that's what it is so
when i think of identity i actually
think of it a little bit differently and
i'd be curious to know if we have
conflicting ideas on identity if we're
just saying
the same thing in different angles so i
think of
identity as a statement that you repeat
to yourself about
who you are um using actual like those
words so in the beginning i
the thing i repeated to myself is i am
soleieri
and i don't know if you know the movie
amadeus or not but soleil was the
character who was just
good enough at music to recognize he
would never be as good as mozart
and when i saw it i was like oh my god
that's me like i'm just smart enough to
realize how much smarter other people
are and so i had that similar lament of
like could you not have made me dumber
so that i don't have the self-awareness
that i don't recognize that i'm not
as good as these people or couldn't you
have made me as good as these people
right but being in the area where it's
like oh man
i just recognize where i'm at so i had
to switch that and
and so a big moment for me was going
actually i am the learner and because i
could repeat it to myself and i could
define what a learner was
and what a learner does and it became so
concrete and so specific
that it gave me a way to see myself that
made me feel good
and a way to behave that moved me
forward
is that is that a collision with how you
see it is that
no it's totally totally complementary so
what you've done is you've translated
you how you thought felt and chose about
yourself from being
someone who almost was that that they're
almost there
to recognizing that actually you are so
you basically
thought felt and chose in order for you
to make a statement it's preceded by
um a thought so you had this thought of
who you were and then you had to change
it to another thought and a thought is a
big concept and it's a real thing
but thoughts come from an action and
that is the unique
identity of um thinking feeling and
choosing so you had to think feel
choose you built a thought and then that
thought became
encapsulated into a statement can can
you tell me what do you mean by choose
okay so um as you um what we do
at incredible speeds on an unconscious
level at like 400 billion actions per
second
we do on a conscious level at a much
slower rate and
we have awareness of our thinking
feeling and choosing
every 10 seconds so as i think i will
feel and as i think and feel
i will choose choice means that you're
building updating your knowledge it's
like a wave of
of knowledge that's been constantly
updated about yourself
choosing what to believe about myself
choosing yes try about everything it's
choice about everything every
experience i get right at the moment as
you're listening to me i'm giving you
information you're thinking feeling and
making choices about what i'm saying so
the three go together
and choice is kind of the it's like it
puts the bow on it it kind of
collapses the wave if you think of a
wave on a beach it's the easiest way to
understand choice
you think and feel the wave balls and
then as you choose the wave crashes so
you make a decision
and then that leads you to the next bit
so let me let me push on that a little
bit so
you've got you're saying things let's
say it's about
identity and so i'm i'm having a
reaction to that or i'm thinking about
it i'm having an emotional reaction to
that and then i'm going to make a
decision about whether i think it's
true or it's false or worthy of pursuit
or whatever
and that sort of narrows the world of
opportunity down into
now that i have a decision about it i've
sort of catalogued it is that
and then the world becomes i've
cataloged all these things in all these
different places and that creates
my what i call frame of reference i
don't know
um what word you would use for that but
yeah you can you can explain it exactly
like that and it's not just a one-off
thing it's a constant
process so there's a lot of little
decisions like a comic strip
if you think of a comic strip there's a
lot of little cartoons
and then but we don't see the individual
cartoons we see a whole flow
so everybody every little cartoon is
like that think feel choose
think phil choose but put together it's
a flow so to get to the point of i am a
learner there were a lot of little
individual parts of the cartoon little
individual think field choose boxes that
led up to the
uh the identity that you created that
you shifted for yourself that you
literally reconceptualized so you so
thinking and feeling and choosing is
mind in action and we're always in
action
24 7 and these are these these are a
bunch of little proteins that are super
computers that are vibrating with i
am a learner in the in little branches
looks like a tree and every experience
that you have
daily is being added to that concept
because you keep on learning
and that's a thought a thought is like a
tree filled with memories
and it's a thought is a huge concept and
it's something that we build from
thinking feeling and choosing but within
it is an
infinite number of branches that you
keep growing
because of each experience so that i am
a learner keeps growing so
the identity keeps growing and changing
along the way
it's very organic so along the way we
experience this we have a relationship
we meet someone else we learn something
new so every time you do an interview
every time you prepare for an interview
every time you have a conversation with
your wife a friend
you are adding to that identity because
you approach
things in terms of i'm learning i'm
learning new stuff all the time
a lot of a lot of people when
that would come into my practice a lot
of people that that contact me now
the thousands will say i don't know who
i am i don't know what my purpose is
i've been told by everyone i can't do
this i can't do that i've gone through
this i've gone through this trauma this
brain injury this autism
or in the racial south africa that i
worked in in this current racist
environment
the value of well you black so you're
not worth the same thing
who are you really so we've all got the
same brain structures and physiology but
the way that you are building this
information and the way that your
viewers are building what i'm saying now
is going to look different we're all
building different trees of what i'm
saying at the moment
based on your unique identity so when we
accept okay
let's um i want to slow down there just
because
i want to make sure that people can
actually piece this together so i'm
going to translate some of this into
just the words that i use and let me
know if i'm actually understanding this
so there's nothing either good or bad
but thinking makes it so right the
sort of immortal shakespeare quote which
i think is really brilliant and
and points to how humans are meaning
making machines
so what i hear you saying is that
in every moment your your thoughts
ultimately come down to a choice that
you're making i like the word show
if i'm understanding correctly i like
the word choice
so i had always taken oh i'm not as good
as other people and that's just who i
am but once i realized oh that's a
choice and i could actually focus my
i could make a different choice which is
that well my brain is plastic and i can
learn so i'm not as good as them
yet and so the insertion of the word yet
became
this incredibly powerful life-changing
decision that i and i've heard you talk
about this in the early days of brain
plasticity it was hotly contested
people were debating it is it real is it
not real and it was you can't teach an
old dog new tricks
whatever number of neurons you're born
with that's what you're going to die
with that's it the brain doesn't make
new cells
and so in the late 90s when i'm sort of
sliding towards depression
and i'm like man i'm i've taken on tens
of thousands of dollars in debt from
college i'm not talented
i'm never going to be able to do what i
want to do for a living and
now i'm lost and so it was a really dark
place but i find brain plasticity it's
hotly debated but i
choose to believe that it's real so when
you talk about
the the tree and sort of the way i think
about
all the branches is that what you're
talking about where these
those little incremental things you're
constantly changing the shape of this
tree
as you make these different choices
about all these little
incremental concepts that you encounter
that you then assign meaning to perfect
you said that perfectly that's exactly
what you're doing
when you think you will automatically
always feel and when you feel you will
automatically
choose we do that as humans whether we
like it or not so we either choosing we
can't never not choose
you know that's one of the arguments
that people say well i'm not going to do
anything
that's a choice so you either you're
choosing either to actually move in one
direction or the other all the time so
the three always go together you cannot
separate them out
so the result that you build is that
tree the thought they look like trees in
the
in the brain we see that they have an
arbor like structure which is
tree-like structure they're constantly
changing they're never the same
they're always updating from every
experience that you have so you're
always growing little branches
there's no space limits to the amount of
branches that you grow there's no space
limit in your brain just by the nature
of how the brain actually
grows itself um and this this is
neurogenesis neuroplasticity which is
the research happening for all these
years
so you a thought then as you think feel
and choose and be talking specifically
about the thought of identity at the
moment which is very core because it
pervades how we view everything in life
it's a very dominant
thought structure that we build into our
brain and it kind of is the sunglasses
we put on and how we
view life that thought when you think
feel and choose and you build the tree
and if my hand is the tree
we can literally imagine that the
inside this tree we've got information
so on the branches
and emotions because we think about
information so we build information
and also the emotions which is the
feeling we experience at that moment
also goes into there so this thought has
information
and emotions and all the little branches
are the memories
of the thought which keep getting added
to
so thoughts are real things they occupy
mental real estate let's talk about
how um nothing can change energy is
never lost we know that from newton
so your energy is never lost energy is
transferred
and let's say that you're you seeing
yourself in a very negative way like
those people
that i work with in south africa or my
patients or the example you gave of
yourself
if we constantly think about ourselves
negatively we're going against the
natural
function of of the the way that the
energy should flow in the brain as we
are going through life
so instead of the fate i should though i
that'll
that'll derail on so i won't um i won't
take us down that path but
to me whether we should or shouldn't um
is certainly we can change the way that
we feel we can change
even the hard wiring of our brain by
getting a grip of our thoughts
and i know one thing you've talked a lot
about yeah
so walk me through like when it comes to
changing your identity so you've got
this tree you've made all these
decisions you've got these emotions
associated with thoughts and
they sort of in my language will cough
up to your conscious mind
at the weirdest of times and cause you
to interpret situations in in an
unhelpful way unless you take control of
that and and i love your
analogy of it being like a tree because
once you get into an organic growth i
start thinking some people the way that
their frame of reference
all those little choices that they've
made have built instead of you know like
a beautiful bonsai tree it's a bramble
and it's
you know it's tangled and there's thorns
and it's like impossible to get your way
through
so how do you help people whether it's
meditation
journaling breathing exercises
developing self-awareness like how do
you help them
take control of that process and begin
to build an identity that serves them
okay brilliant question so if you use
your mind in a very determined way so if
you control your choices and you
you've said this you've said this both
of us that when you think and feel and
choose you have the ability to change
your choices to control your choices
so that thinking and feeling is leading
to the change of the choice
when you do that you change the
structure of your brain because the
thinking feeling choosing moves through
your brain leads to genetic change in
your brain which then builds the little
proteins that actually hold the thought
which are the
and the proteins make the branches of
the tree so this is when we talk about
neuroplasticity the visual you can
actually imagine
is of tree branches growing so there is
structural change so you are changing
matter with mind so what is mind think
you'll choose
what is matter it's the physical
substance or substrate of the brain and
the body and then the brain controls the
body
so how do you teach people to be
conscious about that process like
for me i always tell people nice and
simple the only identity that's going to
serve you long term is
that of the learner period simple as
it's the most foundational i
i am very open if somebody has a better
answer i will immediately
adopt it but it's anti-fragile to use
naseem to lebs term where the more you
attack
somebody with a the mindset of the
learner the stronger you make them
because
their their identity is not associated
with being right with being good or
worthy or anything that's fragile being
smart
it's all around cool i i want to know
where
i'm wrong because i want to improve my
very self-esteem
is attached to my willingness to learn
to stare nakedly at my inadequacies and
get better
so that's sort of my foundational thing
that i hand to people and say look just
do
that if you build your identity around
that you're gonna be golden i give them
the phrases to repeat
um what's the the scaffolding or
process is probably a better way to say
it what's the process that you give
people
for changing their identity in a very
specific way
okay so first of all learner is an
excellent way because learner means that
you're always open to change
so you're always open to thinking
feeling and making choices
so learner is an excellent an excellent
word to use for that because you can't
learn unless you think
and feel and and make choices i quickly
want to just frame it with
related to something that you mentioned
a moment ago because it'll make it
easier to understand
the how our brain should flow you the
word should you you paused on the word
should
everyone's got their own shirt i want to
stress that there is no
um normal brain yale actually brought a
study out in 2018 and
i stress that i all my research all my
neuroscience research is done
looking at people as individual case
studies so you are your own measure
and the whole mental health movement
completely is counter to that
because the i'd say the vast majority of
the biomedical model because it doesn't
look as
the individual as an individual in the
context of their story
and measure against themselves and look
at what they've gone through what
they're going through
and the societal et cetera et cetera
it's
more these are the symptoms diagnosis
symptoms give you a label
and lock you into a box and that has
been very detrimental to
mental health we've gone backwards in
mental health for the last 60 years
it hasn't worked it's made things worse
what we have to get back to
is the recognition of the individual so
when i say should it's not should
against any measure
it is there's a certain pattern in the
brain that we see
when are when we've got a handle on how
we comfortable
and being comfortable is also being
uncomfortable so
i have maybe you feel depressed like you
express express that you went through
depression
so if you're feeling depressed or
anxious these are not illnesses these
are not
limiting illnesses these are signals
that there's something going on in your
life that you need to look at so
depression related to identity i can't
achieve what i'm
what i don't believe i'm ever going to
make it i'm just not good enough for it
ever all that
thought of i'm not good enough had all
the little memories of whatever for
whatever experience inside of that
so that's just frames it so how do we
fix that
so what i studied was the science of
thought so if we
think feel and choose to build a thought
how does that process happen in the
brain
and how can i translate that back for a
patient who's suffering from depression
or child who's batting with learning
issues or
someone who has an identity crisis or
whatever so there's five basic things
that your brain goes through but there's
a preparation phase
first the preparation is the mindfulness
the breathing
all those things which then prepares the
body on a physiological level
and a neurophysiological level for the
sympathetic and the parasympathetic
nervous system to balance and
for us to get mindful in the moment as
soon as you are
they have done mindfulness training for
example and some mindfulness work or bit
of meditation
and breathing you then your brain is
then in a phase
phase state where the different energies
of the brain
alpha beta theta data delta nothing
weird um
are all flowing like in a beach think of
a c think of the seed you go
far out in the sea you've got the huge
swell um and that's like it's deep and
it's big and it's massive
but it's this massive swell that's delta
then you come in a little closer and
it's
a big swell but it's not as big that's
theta and those two represent
the deep the the non-conscious mind
which is the biggest part of us that
non-physical part of us we are
intelligences our memories
it's working 24 7. it's huge it's
churning this is why the c analogy is
really good
then you've got you come in a little
closer to the shore and you get alpha
which is now starting to build into more
of a way that you can recognize the
typical wave form
and then you get um high beta which is
kind of the top of the wave where you're
starting to see the white crest
and then you get the beta where it
crashes onto the beach and then you get
the little ripple which is what we would
call
gamma so these the beta gamma
beta um are all dealing with conscious
or very active twenty all of them are
active all the time but they become more
active when you conscious and awake
um and when you are sleeping the others
become more conscious but they've got to
work together because it's the conscious
and the non-conscious mind
and the alpha is a state that your brain
goes into where you can actually capture
and get access to the non-conscious mind
by being aware of the conscious mind
okay so how do you do it so the first
how do we get this wave flowing that
sometimes will be a big wave and
sometimes small just depending on
circumstances you have a trauma you have
this you have that
it's all normal okay it's all part of
life it's all we get up and down anxiety
these are
all things that we experience so we have
to normalize
um depression anxiety and yes you have
extreme states from extreme
circumstances and we can talk about that
in
a moment but life is is a wave but it's
not a perfect wave all the time
but what we don't want is to to become a
tsunami
or a white river rapid you know it's
like overwhelming
you and you feel like even if it does
you can still control it
through your choices so we have this
phenomenal ability as humans
of awareness but and it's a skill that
we need to learn so what i'm talking
about now in the five steps that i'm
going to now summarize for you
and it summarizes all my if i have to
give you one word for all
the work that i've done it's mind
management i teach
mind management based and i show the
evidence of mind management which is
basically
neuroplasticity happening through
showing people that when you do certain
mind
actions you're going to change your
physiology your blood etc
even your cells have even shown that
your telomeres will grow
or shorten depending on how you manage
your mind which is incredibly important
for biological aging cellular health etc
and then also the changes inside of your
brain so
the first thing that we as humans are
very good at but we
can get very bad at if we get very
distracted is awareness
and self-regulation so step number one
is developing our awareness our skill of
awareness
this is something we have to develop and
it's something that needs to be grown
and it's something that you need to
teach our kids in schools
can you give like a super quick example
of how people can improve their
awareness
okay so it's being a it's actually using
what i call the multiple perspective
advantage so it's
standing back and observing your own
thinking feeling and choosing you can do
it with me right now
so as we're talking all the listeners
and viewers can do this right now
be very aware like i'm very weird enough
my fingers moving i'm aware of your
facial expression
i'm aware of what's behind you i'm aware
of my own body movements
i'm a wave of conversation and the
relationship developing
how you feel i'm sorry you know i'm
aware i'm and i'm watching my thinking
i'm feeling and choosing in terms of my
choice of words so i'm highly aware
which is a state that you will come out
of when you in mindfulness
when you do my meditation you get into a
very aware state of your
of your um what you are feeling
physically
how maybe your toes saw maybe your um
your heart beating faster whatever i'm
just giving random examples
so it's being very tuned in to what's
going on in terms of
your thinking and your physical and the
emotional so what
information am i thinking about what
emotions am i experiencing what
physical sensations and it's developing
that
with our very mo with our modern era
we've become very distracted
um they did a very interesting study at
harvard and a couple of other
universities
teamed up with them where they put
people into
a room and they took away all the
iphones
any kind of technology they just had to
sit the instruction was just to think
they had 18 to 75 year olds and they
just had to think
and they only had to do it for 16
minutes and the majority
absolutely hated it they couldn't do it
they were they were frustrated
they were irritated there was a shocking
device in the room it was very well
hidden
and some of them were so bored that they
found a shocking device and they shocked
themselves they'd rather shock
themselves than sit and think
just 10 years ago this kind of the same
kind of research was done and people
loved it
people have in our modern era and i'm
not anti-technology it's brilliant but
it's mind
management of technology when we lose
our
awareness skill we aren't aware of
having a way of you and how you feeling
i lose
a natural part of me which is empathy
awareness is
very much related to empathy empathy for
myself
my identity who i am empathy for others
empathy
for my impact that i'm making on my
having on others um awareness of
i'm getting irritated why am i getting
irritated not just
reacting and being irritated so we see
in our current modern era we can't just
blame our modern era but it's playing
into it it's making
it more difficult when we are so busy
with um
technology and things so accessible or
the lifestyle that it's not everything
is just on your it and you can just get
everything so quickly
and we we haven't taken enough time to
think and your brain needs to reboot
so part of awareness is awareness of
what am i thinking at the moment why did
i just snap at
my spouse why did i feel irritated with
that why did i
once the interruption of awareness is
that the rebooting that you're talking
about or is
meditating in shifting from say beta to
alpha
is that the rebooting it's all a process
so once again it's a process so it's
it's a determined
choice once again to stand back and
observe your own thinking so you use
your choice to observe your choice
so you're going into and when people do
this we see massive activity in the
frontal
lobe showing that there's a lot of
insight happening so you're watching
yourself almost like that
scrooge movie where he goes and watches
himself growing up as a child where you
actually
you know that movie is a very good
analogy of what i'm talking about
that is something we need to develop
it's there in us but it's something that
we have to grow
so awareness is related to that concept
it's also developed through thinker
moments
daydreaming mind wandering but in a
sense where you don't let your mind go
off on a tangent but you
have a fixed amount of time where you
let your mind you just
do that in the room just think just let
your mind think and to be very aware of
your thinking and to notice the
intrusive thoughts
to i mean 95 percent of 95 to 99 of
people
have got intrusive thoughts and i don't
know why they say that in the research
it should be 100
because we all have intrusive thoughts
but what they're trying to say is that
about 94
of people suffer from intrusive thoughts
that are actually debilitating
and then what we tend to do is um don't
we don't focus on them we shove them
down
but if you shove something down it goes
back even stronger than it was before
so if you don't deal with something then
it creates a very damaged energy pattern
in the brain so the energy now
now you're going to get too much delta
activity and theta activity
and that means that when you go to sleep
at night you won't go into
the the non-rem sleep which is your deep
sleep for example and you have to get
enough of that sleep
in order to release growth hormone
factors in order to release
telomerase for cells a million different
things go on
so if we go to if we don't manage our
minds i'm just giving a couple of
examples
and awareness is the first step and
awareness
is all five steps are about the
management right
all of them and okay so i won't derail
us so
um number one we've got awareness and
then number two
number two is reflection so but before
awareness comes preparation so never
forget we prepare we've set our brain
and body with the
meditation building etc awareness then
is this whole
becoming aware of what you're thinking
feeling and choosing a quick example
before i go into reflection let's say
that we take let's take your example
so now you became aware of that you were
actually seeing yourself as someone who
almost was good enough but not good
enough kind of thing that was this
thought concept and then you had all
these examples and you even gave it a
label
so that's the first thing if we use just
identity as an example this these five
steps can be applied to
anything you're going through whether it
is a toxic habit a toxic trauma
an identity issue like we're talking
about now um just the day-to-day
managing life
you can use these five steps because
it's mind management
it's how you control your thinking
feeling and choosing to make sure your
brain stays
obeys you stays online so that you can
manage the next moment and not react um
that you can be proactive
in your reactions and not not reactive
because the reactive will cause brain
damage and you can fix it but then it's
more work
so we can always fix a trauma we can
always fix a bad decision so
you know we don't have to beat ourselves
up about that but we can also learn
to be more proactive so the first step
is the area the second step is
reflection
reflection is why did i even think that
in the first place
what were the root causes of the reason
that you felt like that about
yourself and i've heard your story
before and there's a lot of stuff that
you went through as a child that
that you could track that back to and if
you ask yourself why you thought that
which is the reflex step it wouldn't
come out straight away it's going to
take you at least
63 days it's going to take you at least
nine weeks minimum it could be
63 days so okay so neuroplasticity
it happens in in various different
cycles the overarching cycle is that it
takes 21 days to build a long-term
memory
to get what we call a gamma peak which
is the evidence that we're learning has
actually taken place i'm coming to your
word of learning because i love the word
learning
learning is what i use for years so
that's why i love that you use that word
so it takes 21 days to learn to build a
long-term memory
now long-term memory means i've built a
tree with information and emotions and
it's there it's in my brain
and um i can use it but if i don't
stabilize it's like a little plant if i
don't water it won't grow
so it's built but it's not accessible so
within 48 hours
or even shorter or maybe within a few
days i know i learned that stuff but i
can't access it so i have to get it to
a deeper level of accessibility i have
to make it
accessible memory i have to automatize
it and the simple word for that is i've
got to turn it into a habit
and that takes at least another two
cycles of 21 days
to turn a new thought tree into an
accessible memory that it becomes a
behavioral change
so you wouldn't have done that i'm a
learner
in overnight no one can do can transform
their identity overnight it's the
cartoon strips it's going to be a little
bit every day
so therefore we see certain time points
with neuroplasticity we see a change
happening
day four day seven day 14 day 21 day 42
days 63
very clear what we would see gamma peaks
in the brain showing that
neuroplasticity is happening that
changes are happening
very exciting because it's evidence that
even if you don't
consciously feel like you're changing we
have the evidence that on your
non-conscious level which is
always 10 steps ahead of your conscious
level in fact it literally is 10 seconds
before you're conscious of anything your
non-conscious is already sending you
messages to to your subconscious through
the via warning signals of you know you
feel agitated or you feel
your heart beats some sort of physical
or something one of the craziest
examples of that is
people with the they have brain damage
that stops them from forming
long-term memories so a doctor will go
in put a pin in their hand
shake hands with this person person
jumps back why'd you poke me
oh yeah sorry about that they come back
in sometimes like three minutes later
very briefly
and they go to shake their hand and the
person will refuse but they can't form
long-term memories so they'll ask them
oh why don't you shake my hand and
they'll give you a bs answer oh
people that wear lab coats and make me
nervous i don't i don't like yeah
people because of germs whatever but the
reality is they're not shaking your hand
because
subconsciously somewhere they have
actually tracked that you had that pin
in your hand and so
there was a sort of emotional memory
formation that doesn't reach the
conscious part so you don't have a
logical explanation
but the brain is so desperate to have a
story that's cohesive and makes sense
that people will cough up these like
super random and not at all true
reasons for why they don't shake hands
that that has always blown me away
fascinating that actually that person
was going through that shock they
literally have um experience they
thought felt chosen
they went through their little cartoon
strips linked for choosing for choose 40
times a second conscious whatever the
whole process 400 billion actions per
second on an unconscious
and they built a tree so it was all on
an unconscious level because that's
where the work
is that's where you're consciously
experiencing but you push it into an
unconscious so you have your
instantaneous memory
where you build a temporary short-term
memory and that you bring them back in
the room and that's what they're
operating from
bring them in three weeks later or even
72 hours later there's a good chance
unless you've reinforced sufficient
times
you wouldn't have the memory would
denature the protein tree
converts to heat energy but if you
sustain it what we see
through learn to learn you have to do
repeated little bits every single day
and then you get it to the point of the
21 days and thereafter you keep on
moving
so when i worked in cycle at schools i
would arrange the
do arrange the the education cycles
in cycles of three so that you would do
your testing at three weeks six weeks
nine weeks so that you keep building and
building and building layer upon layer
upon layer a little bit every day
if you're doing trauma work like you're
working through some really major toxic
trauma
even identity which can be very
traumatic is you do very limited time in
the day
so if it's if it's brain building like
school work or learning something
there's no limit how much time you spend
the more you spend the better it builds
resilience in your brain
credible for mental health but when
you're trying to deal with a toxic thing
like a toxic mindset like
i'm not good enough i can't i'm just
never going to reach that level
that you had to shift that you keep to
around 37
between 7 and 30 minutes a day why
because of the emotional load
and people can get so overwhelmed
emotionally that you get all these
chemical reactions that keep happening
over and over and over and you're not
giving yourself that thinker break
to be able to capture that thought and
then it becomes a thought that
like an ocd thought or a repetitive
thought intrusive that you don't control
so mind management is not to allow that
to happen mind management is to
do very concentrated work on the trauma
whatever it is the identity
for seven to thirty minutes and then you
don't work on it the rest of the day you
just have
prompts for the rest of the day so let
me let me translate this back into the
finish the five steps and then we can
circle back to this exact example so
we've aware
where that you've got that mindset you
start reflecting on it
and so in day one of 63 days
you would have day one you discovered
this one little branch on the tree and
the next day another five little
branches and then that remind you these
little
so each day it builds a little bit
little bit we've heard so much about how
habits build this is the science behind
habit formation that i'm describing
you're actually growing the extra little
branches and you're making connections
across different parts oh that happened
there that happened there that's why
you're building it into this
network in your brain you're building
this big oak tree that then has all
these
like the roots you know the root system
of trees tends to go think of in san
fran the
the the huge um what are those trees
called those massive trees
they're root systems the redwoods thank
you the
the root systems are very much like our
brain they
just they grow across they cross into
each other and that's what happens as
you
reflect so in your reflex stage you are
drawing on
all the experiences and building it into
a new cohesive tree
then it's important that you also that
you then write so the third step is we
genetically
write as we choose the wave crashes we
switch on and off genes
and when that happens proteins are made
and those are the proteins that are the
little computers that hold the thoughts
that's why i say thoughts are real
thoughts aren't these ethereal weirdo
things
those are real physical things that
occupy mental real estate like a house
occupies physical real estate in land
and you build them
you control them you change them you can
add to them you can
they're always able to be updated and
they
every experience updates them so your
tree by now because this is quite a few
years back is pretty big
because you've now constantly learned
and you've shown yourself you now have
your identities very clear
so across your brain your sunglasses are
now of your identity are
of one of i am a learner and you
prove it to yourself every single day
and confirm that message to yourself
every single single day and it pervades
everything so you've now
like a good virus um it spreads across
the whole brain it infects the whole
brain
and it affects it through the neurons
through the synapses through the
physical structures
as well as through the energy that flows
through the through the
alpha beta delta theta et cetera et
cetera and you kind of work out and then
you have something will happen it'll
knock your identity someone will say
something
you question yourself you'll have a
little wobble and that's great you
embrace it
so there's awareness now i'm aware that
there's something
i feel this this person said this it's
made me feel this about my identity
let me reflect on it become aware let me
reflect okay
so i jumped ahead a little bit there to
give you an example of those two steps
but you need to write this down
so when we write we all know about
journaling and everyone goes on and on
about writing it's it's real
writing does the most phenomenal stuff
in the in the brain you literally put
your brain on paper but
one of the best ways of writing is to
just when you try to work through stuff
is to just
pour your thoughts on a page it doesn't
have to be neat the
more messy the better so when you write
you actually allow a release of energy
you allow the parts of the brain that
are called the basal ganglia that are
like in the middle of the brain like
directly behind your eyes in the middle
between your eyes and your nose deep
down
you allow a flow of energy between the
temporal lobe
the amygdala and the prefrontal cortex
and the dorsolateral p
all these fancy areas of your brain okay
we get we get all this
energy but it flows you get gamma waves
flowing from the front to the back of
the way
brain so we see this beautiful and
you're saying this is all happening from
writing
it's from all of these steps building up
and but riding allows a free flow of
energy
so right you want people to do those
three steps like literally
time sequentially so i i sit down i prep
myself i'm meditating
i'm developing the awareness i'm
reflecting on it now i'm journaling and
so this is maybe over 20 or 30 minutes
okay so then what's step four step four
then is recheck so now you've written
and you've got all this stuff down and
it's normally a huge mess and that's
better that's great whatever just pull
it out
that releases all this energy you start
pulling up stuff you don't even know is
there
then recheck is to look at what you've
written and try and reconceptualize it
see it differently redesigned what have
i said what am i saying it's like a
when they do an autopsy on someone who
to try and find out what's what the
cause of death was
that's what you're doing you're doing an
autopsy you actually just what i'm
talking about is brain surgery
without the blood you literally are
doing brain surgery you pulling a
thought up
to awareness you are dissecting it and
starting the autopsy process through
reflection
you putting that down on paper in your
written
point so that you can now look at what
you've what you've
identified and now you are looking in
the recheck you're trying to make sense
of that what are the patterns
and each day is a tiny step forward so
you're not going to solve the identity
crisis in one day that's what i keep
talking about the 63 days and sometimes
you might do multiple
because as you come up with one you find
oh there's all these things but you will
get to a level
and then the recheck leads you to um a
re-conceptualizing a redesigning of okay
i saw myself like this i've been seeing
myself like this
it seems like this could be one of the
causes now what could i do
today this is very important what can i
do now
we tend to do this big thing i can fix
this all in in one day
you're not going to get there like that
you have to take a tiny tiny little bit
you have to focus on what you can do
today so step five is
an active reach from my recheck trying
to make sense of this i'm not going to
make sense of the whole thing today but
something there will make a little bit
of sense now i'm going to do something
very simple a little
of reach which could be as simple as
okay well when i feel
that i'm useless i'm actually going to
tell myself i'm not useless
it could be a song that you sing in your
head it could be
a reach because you're reaching towards
a goal okay
so i'm actively taking a step towards my
goal yes i'm doing something physical
and here's the really cool thing is what
we found from the research is that
when you take a little thing a statement
as simple as
um if if i feel like i can't do it i can
do it a simple statement
if i um if i see myself as being
not a learner i see myself as being a
learner the simplest
step even if you don't believe it
consciously you have gone through a
process
of you now rewiring you're building a
new pattern in your brain so you've got
this toxic tree
okay so this i drag around the world
it's from south africa it's a little
wiry tree
but thoughts look like this okay so this
is now toxic tree so i'm going to bring
this
into awareness step one okay then you're
going to reflect on this what are these
little branches why why
why the why why am i thinking ask answer
discuss
then i'm going to start writing down
what i discover then i'm going to look
recheck i'm going to look at what i've
discovered
and then i'm going to develop some kind
of little action
that little action i in my app that i've
developed to
to teach the system you can put in like
the reminders on your iphone
you can type it in to set it to go off
and remind you seven times a day
why seven it seems like if we have
intervals of seven during the course of
the day
where a little prompt comes up on your
computer screen and reminds you
you know like you've got to go and do
some shopping and you remind you keep in
mind until you press complete
on your iphone that's what i'm talking
about by taking the little simple
statement and putting it into your
iphone
and it just pops up on your screen or
you can write it on a journal you can do
whatever
i just like to use technology in that
way i
i don't have to do anything it takes me
a second to read it but it reminds me
so in other words i'm blending my
conscious and my non-conscious mind so
the work i'm doing in my unconscious
mind
is being reminded during the course of
the day every reminder is a little drop
of water to order the plant to give it
more energy
the more energy i give the healthy
there's a healthy one okay there's a
nice healthy one
the more energy i give this the less
energy this has so i'm not ignoring this
i'm not doing what traditional methods
will say we must just suppress this you
can't this never goes away
i have to actually redesign this you had
to redesign your identity
you still talk about your previous
identity but you don't talk about it
from this
angle you talk about it from this angle
you used to think like that
and there will be days where a little
bit of this pops back in but then you
can wire it out and catch it quickly and
get it out again
but the whole point here is that a lot
of traditional cognitive behavior
therapy identifies a thought
and then teaches you techniques to talk
it away to try and convince yourself
that's really hard work and it's not
sustainable mindfulness
and i mean meditation and things will
get you in the right state but this is
these five steps are beyond mindfulness
what i've shown from my research is that
you can have a boomerang effect if you
just become aware and you don't do
something
you can go back into that state and get
worse classic case example
is in my most recent research we had a
control group and an experimental group
the control group were not given the
technique
which was these five steps in an app
form so they didn't get the individual
therapy it was all done because i'm a
firm believer that you as a person are
brilliant you have this resilience in
you and you have the ability to give
yourself a lot of coaching
so what we did was in this in this
research study which was double blind
random controlled all the gold standard
done with um as a single subject design
which means i looked at the individual
measured them against themselves
and then we did do a group we did
compare the experimental to the control
group
so we did a lot of different testing
simplified we did three areas of testing
and
one was psychological i have a scale
i've developed that looks at the
non-conscious mind how are you thinking
etc your awareness
self-regulation that kind of stuff we
use traditional scales that they use in
hospitals and whatever and we used the
narrative
very important what's your story that's
the most important thing what is your
story what's going on in your life what
is your circumstances
most important part of the psychological
then he looks at blood and telomeres and
cortisol and all the traditional thing
telomeres are caps on
on the chromosomes x chromosomes on your
dna and those little caps are very
significant when it comes to cellular
health and when people are under toxic
stress they
shorten and when you manage your stress
they lengthen
i showed that in nine weeks you can
lengthen the telomeres and it's
actually almost unheard of except dr
apple who's the
leading scientist nobel prize winner in
this area has started showing that you
can make these changes within nine weeks
so we've confirmed that with the study
that when you manage your mind
you can change your cellular health your
biological age in other words
um and so you control that so you
literally with your mind control how
your dna functions you control
for example we all know about cortisol
cortisol drives so many things
we saw a significant relationship as
people manage their mind using their
five steps
um um in terms of cortisol dropping to
the to because everyone's cortisol is
also measured against themselves not
against the standard
there's a basic standard but would be
such a variability within that
homocysteine is another one so in other
words
without confusing everyone we looked at
blood we looked at
dna we looked at psychological and we
looked in the brain using qeg which is
very accurate looking at the energy and
how the brain is responding
so in the control in the experimental
group and the control group they all got
this testing
so everyone was made very aware of
that they all knew it was a mental
health study but the difference was the
experimental group got the technique
so what we saw was major difference with
day one today 21 in the experimental
group there was a significant
reduction in anxiety by 81 that doesn't
mean anxiety will go away it means that
you manage it
anxiety will always be with us we need
to understand anxiety is a normal human
response so it's depression so it's ocd
so is our intrusive thoughts there are
all signals
telling us hey cool down focus take a
moment
something's going on in your life so
what we what i teach people is that
this is always going to be with us but
we've got to know where it gets
unhealthy and how to manage that
and it'll be periods in your life where
it does get unhealthy that's okay
you can manage it and that's what we saw
happening a reduction in depression
reduction
in anxiety up to 81 significant changes
in
cortisol levels significant changes in
telomere length we had
some millennials we had quite a lot of
millennials on the study that had
biological ages that were 20 years
older than their chronological age and
by the end of the study they were
back at their normal age biological age
i mean this is
nine weeks the subjects that did the
process every day and they would spend
seven
to get through those five steps for a
trauma thing you can do this
sequentially as as you asked earlier on
in as short as seven minutes
and so it's a minute and a half per each
step so it's not long
but then over 63 days that's when you
see the change but we saw changes
in as early as seven days that doesn't
mean you stop and this is always the
danger i found with my patients
because you see change so quickly you
think oh i've got this under control
but you'll lose that seven days is not
enough to cause
to allow the neuroplasticity to take
place so changes occurred but all the
proteins are unstable
they have to get to a stable state in
fact what we see in the brain
is the little branches where your
memories are stored in the trees
when people are at day seven for example
it's just a tiny bump on the outside
there's like a little bump that joins it
by day 21 it's changed into a mushroom
shape this is work done by dr marian
diamond who died at 94 last year
one of the leading researchers when it
comes to this
with that memory stored in dendrites not
in synapses
and she showed with her work that it
changes over time
and when you've got a bump shape it's
not a strong enough memory that's
seven days at 14 days it becomes a
lollipop shape the little connector
where the leaf connects to the branch
and then by day 21 it's a mushroom and
it's only when it's mushrooms
that we can start automatizing building
the habit making something
useful inside of us how many times do
people say i'm going to do this wellness
course i'm going to read this book i'm
going to do that thing
you teach people about goals all the
time whatever wellness
change whatever food change diet change
exercise change business goal
but to make your brain learn that you
put it into the conscious subconscious
and unconscious
to a point where you can actually
utilize it it's going to take you
you have to go through the proper brain
system and that's pretty much what i've
researched that's mind management
in a nutshell nice well that was
incredible thank you so much for
walking us through that that that is a
lot of
life lessons research everything put
into a nice simple formula so thank you
so much guys if you haven't she's got a
whole
world of stuff she's written several
books on
topics about memory and mind management
getting this all together so
take a look if there's anything that
you're struggling with and you can put
that five step process to the use
do it for sure getting your mind under
control is a shared obsession that you
and i have
uh you guys will all benefit greatly
from it dr leaf thank you so
much for being with us today i really
appreciate it and guys if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe
and until next time my friends be
legendary take care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already
be sure to subscribe you're going to get
weekly videos on building a growth
mindset cultivating grit
and unlocking your full potential
you